documentation/jetty-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/programming-guide/client/http/client-http-transport.adoc, before:

//
// ========================================================================
// Copyright (c) 1995-2022 Mort Bay Consulting Pty Ltd and others.
//
// This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
// terms of the Eclipse Public License v. 2.0 which is available at
// https://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-2.0, or the Apache License, Version 2.0
// which is available at https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.
//
// SPDX-License-Identifier: EPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0
// ========================================================================
//

[[pg-client-http-transport]]
==== HttpClient Pluggable Transports

Jetty's `HttpClient` can be configured to use different transport protocols to carry the semantic of HTTP requests and responses.

This means that the intention of a client to request resource `/index.html` using the `GET` method can be carried over the network in different formats.

An `HttpClient` transport is the component that is in charge of converting a high-level, semantic, HTTP requests such as " ``GET`` resource ``/index.html`` " into the specific format understood by the server (for example, HTTP/2 or HTTP/3), and to convert the server response from the specific format (HTTP/2 or HTTP/3) into high-level, semantic objects that can be used by applications.

The most common protocol format is HTTP/1.1, a textual protocol with lines separated by `\r\n`:

[source,screen]
----
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1\r\n
Host: domain.com\r\n
...
\r\n
----

However, the same request can be made using FastCGI, a binary protocol:

[source,screen]
----
x01 x01 x00 x01 x00 x08 x00 x00
x00 x01 x01 x00 x00 x00 x00 x00
x01 x04 x00 x01 xLL xLL x00 x00
x0C x0B  D   O   C   U   M   E
 N   T   _   U   R   I   /   i
 n   d   e   x   .   h   t   m
 l
...
----

Similarly, HTTP/2 is a binary protocol that transports the same information in a yet different format via TCP, while HTTP/3 is a binary protocol that transports the same information in yet another format via UDP.

A protocol may be _negotiated_ between client and server.
A request for a resource may be sent using one protocol (for example, HTTP/1.1), but the response may arrive in a different protocol (for example, HTTP/2).

`HttpClient` supports these static transports, each speaking only one protocol:

* xref:pg-client-http-transport-http11[HTTP/1.1] (both clear-text and TLS encrypted)
* xref:pg-client-http-transport-http2[HTTP/2] (both clear-text and TLS encrypted)
* xref:pg-client-http-transport-http3[HTTP/3] (only encrypted via QUIC+TLS)
* xref:pg-client-http-transport-fcgi[FastCGI] (both clear-text and TLS encrypted)

`HttpClient` also supports one xref:pg-client-http-transport-dynamic[dynamic transport], that can speak different protocols and can select the right protocol by negotiating it with the server or by explicit indication from applications.

Furthermore, every transport protocol can be sent either over the network or via Unix-Domain sockets.
Supports for Unix-Domain sockets requires Java 16 or later, since Unix-Domain sockets support has been introduced in OpenJDK with link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/380[JEP 380].

Applications are typically not aware of the actual protocol being used.
This allows them to write their logic against a high-level API that hides the details of the specific protocol being used over the network.

[[pg-client-http-transport-http11]]
===== HTTP/1.1 Transport

HTTP/1.1 is the default transport.

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=defaultTransport]
----

If you want to customize the HTTP/1.1 transport, you can explicitly configure it in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=http11Transport]
----

[[pg-client-http-transport-http2]]
===== HTTP/2 Transport

The HTTP/2 transport can be configured in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=http2Transport]
----

`HTTP2Client` is the lower-level client that provides an API based on HTTP/2 concepts such as _sessions_, _streams_ and _frames_ that are specific to HTTP/2. See xref:pg-client-http2[the HTTP/2 client section] for more information.

`HttpClientTransportOverHTTP2` uses `HTTP2Client` to format high-level semantic HTTP requests (like "GET resource /index.html") into the HTTP/2 specific format.

[[pg-client-http-transport-http3]]
===== HTTP/3 Transport

The HTTP/3 transport can be configured in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=http3Transport]
----

`HTTP3Client` is the lower-level client that provides an API based on HTTP/3 concepts such as _sessions_, _streams_ and _frames_ that are specific to HTTP/3. See xref:pg-client-http3[the HTTP/3 client section] for more information.

`HttpClientTransportOverHTTP3` uses `HTTP3Client` to format high-level semantic HTTP requests (like "GET resource /index.html") into the HTTP/3 specific format.

[[pg-client-http-transport-fcgi]]
===== FastCGI Transport

The FastCGI transport can be configured in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=fcgiTransport]
----

In order to make requests using the FastCGI transport, you need to have a FastCGI server such as link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PHP#PHPFPM[PHP-FPM] (see also link:http://php.net/manual/en/install.fpm.php).

The FastCGI transport is primarily used by Jetty's xref:pg-server-fastcgi[FastCGI support] to serve PHP pages (WordPress for example).

[[pg-client-http-transport-dynamic]]
===== Dynamic Transport

The static transports work well if you know in advance the protocol you want to speak with the server, or if the server only supports one protocol (such as FastCGI).

With the advent of HTTP/2 and HTTP/3, however, servers are now able to support multiple protocols, at least both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2.

The HTTP/2 protocol is typically negotiated between client and server.
This negotiation can happen via ALPN, a TLS extension that allows the client to tell the server the list of protocol that the client supports, so that the server can pick one of the client supported protocols that also the server supports; or via HTTP/1.1 upgrade by means of the `Upgrade` header.

Applications can configure the dynamic transport with one or more _application_ protocols such as HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2. The implementation will take care of using TLS for HTTPS URIs, using ALPN if necessary, negotiating protocols, upgrading from one protocol to another, etc.

By default, the dynamic transport only speaks HTTP/1.1:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=dynamicDefault]
----

The dynamic transport can be configured with just one protocol, making it equivalent to the corresponding static transport:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=dynamicOneProtocol]
----

The dynamic transport, however, has been implemented to support multiple transports, in particular both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=dynamicH1H2]
----

IMPORTANT: The order in which the protocols are specified to `HttpClientTransportDynamic` indicates what is the client preference.
If the protocol is negotiated via ALPN, it is the server that decides what is the protocol to use for the communication, regardless of the client preference.
If the protocol is not negotiated, the client preference is honored.

Provided that the server supports both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2 clear-text, client applications can explicitly hint the version they want to use:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=dynamicClearText]
----

In case of TLS encrypted communication using the HTTPS scheme, things are a little more complicated.

If the client application explicitly specifies the HTTP version, then ALPN is not used on the client.
By specifying the HTTP version explicitly, the client application has prior-knowledge of what HTTP version the server supports, and therefore ALPN is not needed.
If the server does not support the HTTP version chosen by the client, then the communication will fail.

If the client application does not explicitly specify the HTTP version, then ALPN will be used on the client.
If the server also supports ALPN, then the protocol will be negotiated via ALPN and the server will choose the protocol to use.
If the server does not support ALPN, the client will try to use the first protocol configured in `HttpClientTransportDynamic`, and the communication may succeed or fail depending on whether the server supports the protocol chosen by the client.

[[pg-client-http-transport-unix-domain]]
===== Unix-Domain Configuration

All the transports can be configured with a `ClientConnector`, the component that is responsible for the transmission of the bytes generated by the transport to the server.

By default, `ClientConnector` uses TCP networking to send bytes to the server and receive bytes from the server.

When you are using Java 16 or later, `ClientConnector` also support xref:pg-client-io-arch-unix-domain[Unix-Domain sockets], and every transport can be configured to use Unix-Domain sockets instead of TCP networking.

To configure Unix-Domain sockets, you can create a `ClientConnector` instance in the following way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=unixDomain]
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
You can use Unix-Domain sockets support only when you run your client application with Java 16 or later.
====

You can configure a Jetty server to use Unix-Domain sockets, as explained in xref:pg-server-http-connector[this section].

Commit message:

Fixes #7575 - Misleading docs for HttpClientTransportDynamic (#7800)
Improved documentation for the clear-text dynamic transport case.
Fixed HttpClientTransportDynamic javadocs.

Signed-off-by: Simone Bordet <simone.bordet@gmail.com>

documentation/jetty-documentation/src/main/asciidoc/programming-guide/client/http/client-http-transport.adoc, after:

//
// ========================================================================
// Copyright (c) 1995-2022 Mort Bay Consulting Pty Ltd and others.
//
// This program and the accompanying materials are made available under the
// terms of the Eclipse Public License v. 2.0 which is available at
// https://www.eclipse.org/legal/epl-2.0, or the Apache License, Version 2.0
// which is available at https://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0.
//
// SPDX-License-Identifier: EPL-2.0 OR Apache-2.0
// ========================================================================
//

[[pg-client-http-transport]]
==== HttpClient Pluggable Transports

Jetty's `HttpClient` can be configured to use different transport protocols to carry the semantic of HTTP requests and responses.

This means that the intention of a client to request resource `/index.html` using the `GET` method can be carried over the network in different formats.

An `HttpClient` transport is the component that is in charge of converting a high-level, semantic, HTTP requests such as " ``GET`` resource ``/index.html`` " into the specific format understood by the server (for example, HTTP/2 or HTTP/3), and to convert the server response from the specific format (HTTP/2 or HTTP/3) into high-level, semantic objects that can be used by applications.

The most common protocol format is HTTP/1.1, a textual protocol with lines separated by `\r\n`:

[source,screen]
----
GET /index.html HTTP/1.1\r\n
Host: domain.com\r\n
...
\r\n
----

However, the same request can be made using FastCGI, a binary protocol:

[source,screen]
----
x01 x01 x00 x01 x00 x08 x00 x00
x00 x01 x01 x00 x00 x00 x00 x00
x01 x04 x00 x01 xLL xLL x00 x00
x0C x0B  D   O   C   U   M   E
 N   T   _   U   R   I   /   i
 n   d   e   x   .   h   t   m
 l
...
----

Similarly, HTTP/2 is a binary protocol that transports the same information in a yet different format via TCP, while HTTP/3 is a binary protocol that transports the same information in yet another format via UDP.

A protocol may be _negotiated_ between client and server.
A request for a resource may be sent using one protocol (for example, HTTP/1.1), but the response may arrive in a different protocol (for example, HTTP/2).

`HttpClient` supports these static transports, each speaking only one protocol:

* xref:pg-client-http-transport-http11[HTTP/1.1] (both clear-text and TLS encrypted)
* xref:pg-client-http-transport-http2[HTTP/2] (both clear-text and TLS encrypted)
* xref:pg-client-http-transport-http3[HTTP/3] (only encrypted via QUIC+TLS)
* xref:pg-client-http-transport-fcgi[FastCGI] (both clear-text and TLS encrypted)

`HttpClient` also supports one xref:pg-client-http-transport-dynamic[dynamic transport], that can speak different protocols and can select the right protocol by negotiating it with the server or by explicit indication from applications.

Furthermore, every transport protocol can be sent either over the network or via Unix-Domain sockets.
Supports for Unix-Domain sockets requires Java 16 or later, since Unix-Domain sockets support has been introduced in OpenJDK with link:https://openjdk.java.net/jeps/380[JEP 380].

Applications are typically not aware of the actual protocol being used.
This allows them to write their logic against a high-level API that hides the details of the specific protocol being used over the network.

[[pg-client-http-transport-http11]]
===== HTTP/1.1 Transport

HTTP/1.1 is the default transport.

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=defaultTransport]
----

If you want to customize the HTTP/1.1 transport, you can explicitly configure it in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=http11Transport]
----

[[pg-client-http-transport-http2]]
===== HTTP/2 Transport

The HTTP/2 transport can be configured in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=http2Transport]
----

`HTTP2Client` is the lower-level client that provides an API based on HTTP/2 concepts such as _sessions_, _streams_ and _frames_ that are specific to HTTP/2. See xref:pg-client-http2[the HTTP/2 client section] for more information.

`HttpClientTransportOverHTTP2` uses `HTTP2Client` to format high-level semantic HTTP requests (like "GET resource /index.html") into the HTTP/2 specific format.

[[pg-client-http-transport-http3]]
===== HTTP/3 Transport

The HTTP/3 transport can be configured in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=http3Transport]
----

`HTTP3Client` is the lower-level client that provides an API based on HTTP/3 concepts such as _sessions_, _streams_ and _frames_ that are specific to HTTP/3. See xref:pg-client-http3[the HTTP/3 client section] for more information.

`HttpClientTransportOverHTTP3` uses `HTTP3Client` to format high-level semantic HTTP requests (like "GET resource /index.html") into the HTTP/3 specific format.

[[pg-client-http-transport-fcgi]]
===== FastCGI Transport

The FastCGI transport can be configured in this way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=fcgiTransport]
----

In order to make requests using the FastCGI transport, you need to have a FastCGI server such as link:https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PHP#PHPFPM[PHP-FPM] (see also link:http://php.net/manual/en/install.fpm.php).

The FastCGI transport is primarily used by Jetty's xref:pg-server-fastcgi[FastCGI support] to serve PHP pages (WordPress for example).

[[pg-client-http-transport-dynamic]]
===== Dynamic Transport

The static transports work well if you know in advance the protocol you want to speak with the server, or if the server only supports one protocol (such as FastCGI).

With the advent of HTTP/2 and HTTP/3, however, servers are now able to support multiple protocols, at least both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2.

The HTTP/2 protocol is typically negotiated between client and server.
This negotiation can happen via ALPN, a TLS extension that allows the client to tell the server the list of protocol that the client supports, so that the server can pick one of the client supported protocols that also the server supports; or via HTTP/1.1 upgrade by means of the `Upgrade` header.

Applications can configure the dynamic transport with one or more _application_ protocols such as HTTP/1.1 or HTTP/2. The implementation will take care of using TLS for HTTPS URIs, using ALPN if necessary, negotiating protocols, upgrading from one protocol to another, etc.

By default, the dynamic transport only speaks HTTP/1.1:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=dynamicDefault]
----

The dynamic transport can be configured with just one protocol, making it equivalent to the corresponding static transport:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=dynamicOneProtocol]
----

The dynamic transport, however, has been implemented to support multiple transports, in particular both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=dynamicH1H2]
----

NOTE: The order in which the protocols are specified to `HttpClientTransportDynamic` indicates what is the client preference.

IMPORTANT: When using TLS (i.e. URIs with the `https` scheme), the application protocol is _negotiated_ between client and server via ALPN, and it is the server that decides what is the application protocol to use for the communication, regardless of the client preference.

When clear-text communication is used (i.e. URIs with the `http` scheme) there is no application protocol negotiation, and therefore the application must know _a priori_ whether the server supports the protocol or not.
For example, if the server only supports clear-text HTTP/2, and `HttpClientTransportDynamic` is configured as in the example above, the client will send, by default, a clear-text HTTP/1.1 request to a clear-text HTTP/2 only server, which will result in a communication failure.

Provided that the server supports both HTTP/1.1 and HTTP/2 clear-text, client applications can explicitly hint the version they want to use:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=dynamicClearText]
----

In case of TLS encrypted communication using the `https` scheme, things are a little more complicated.

If the client application explicitly specifies the HTTP version, then ALPN is not used by the client.
By specifying the HTTP version explicitly, the client application has prior-knowledge of what HTTP version the server supports, and therefore ALPN is not needed.
If the server does not support the HTTP version chosen by the client, then the communication will fail.

If the client application does not explicitly specify the HTTP version, then ALPN will be used by the client.
If the server also supports ALPN, then the protocol will be negotiated via ALPN and the server will choose the protocol to use.
If the server does not support ALPN, the client will try to use the first protocol configured in `HttpClientTransportDynamic`, and the communication may succeed or fail depending on whether the server supports the protocol chosen by the client.

[[pg-client-http-transport-unix-domain]]
===== Unix-Domain Configuration

All the transports can be configured with a `ClientConnector`, the component that is responsible for the transmission of the bytes generated by the transport to the server.

By default, `ClientConnector` uses TCP networking to send bytes to the server and receive bytes from the server.

When you are using Java 16 or later, `ClientConnector` also support xref:pg-client-io-arch-unix-domain[Unix-Domain sockets], and every transport can be configured to use Unix-Domain sockets instead of TCP networking.

To configure Unix-Domain sockets, you can create a `ClientConnector` instance in the following way:

[source,java,indent=0]
----
include::../../{doc_code}/org/eclipse/jetty/docs/programming/client/http/HTTPClientDocs.java[tag=unixDomain]
----

[IMPORTANT]
====
You can use Unix-Domain sockets support only when you run your client application with Java 16 or later.
====

You can configure a Jetty server to use Unix-Domain sockets, as explained in xref:pg-server-http-connector[this section].
